---
title: Axioms
linktitle: Chapter 1
toc: true
type: book
date: "2020-12-15T00:00:00+01:00"
draft: false
menu:
  Part I:
    parent: Part I
    weight: 1

# Prev/next pager order (if `docs_section_pager` enabled in `params.toml`)
weight: 1
---

Axioms are first principles. They are are basic propositions or assumptions that cannot be deduced from other propositions or assumptions.  The first foundation of our Clinical Inquiry are epistemological axioms (as opposed to logical axioms which are covered later). We could have started with logical axioms. The decision to start with epistemological axioms is because a Clinical Inquiry is a system of clinical epistemology - concerned with clinical knowledge, especially regarding its methods, validity, and scope. A second reason is that in Clinical Inquiry we use logic to justify the truth of our beliefs. Which means, we use logic to validate knowledge. Therefore, in Clinical Inquiry logic is used in the service of epistemology, not the other way around (epistemology in the service of logic). Though in the system epistemology does set some useful parameters for the use of logic which is why logic and epistemology have a bi-directional connection in our tetrad of philosophical inquiry.

## Epistemology

Epistemology is the branch of philosophy concerned with knowledge, especially regarding its methods, validity, and scope. It is the investigation of what distinguishes justified true belief (as a definition of knowledge) from opinion. The approach taken in this book is influenced by my Christian worldview and tends toward McGrath’s explication of Bhaskar’s ideas, an epistemology called critical realism. [1] You may be an empiricist, a rationalist, a pragmatist, maybe an idealist, or you may not think about your epistemology or worldview. But, whether you think about it or not theoretically, you are practicing some form of epistemology practically. If you believe all worldview are equally valid then you’re worldview is postmodern, sometimes also referred to as relative. The epistemology you follow impacts, potentially unconsciously, what you believe and in turn what you believe impacts your epistemology.  Since what you believe also influences how you behave and how you make decisions it is bound to influence your clinical reasoning. It is also possible that your epistemology may not cohere with other aspects of your worldview which can lead to inconsistencies and contradictions. Since the purpose of this book is on clinical inquiry we do not deal with personal inconsistencies or contradictions.  In this chapter we start with realism as a step toward a common ground for most people called common sense realism as a set of epistemological axioms that most people tend to agree.
￼
- [1] McGrath, Alister E. Scientific Theology: Reality. Vol. 2. A&C Black, 2000.

### Realism

In philosophy realism is classically juxtaposed to nominalism. So our first step is to accept realism as an axiomatic foundation and we start by understanding nominalism. Nominalism is the view that things denominated by the same term share nothing except that fact.  What all chairs have in common is that they are called ‘chairs’ and that is all. Nominalism is associated with the thought that everything that exists is a particular (pleural, particulars), and therefore there are no universals, only a bunch of particulars.  A universal is a property or relation that can be instanced or instantiated by a number of particulars. You can think of this as related to set theory. If you can put all the particulars into into a set and comprehend something about the particulars based on the fact that they are part of the set then that set is a universal. Nominalism denies the existence of universals. It claims only particulars exist and denies the existence of sets of particulars that have meaning, provide context and contribute to knowledge. Realism accepts the existence of universals.[1] Also, it does not deny the existence of particulars. It simply allows categorizing particulars into universals (universal sets). If this all sounds strange to you it is most likely that you’ve simply been accepting realism your entire life. One extreme example is that if you don’t accept realism then just because (1 + 1 = 2) doesn’t mean that it will equal 2 the next time you encounter (1 + 1). All of the mathematical, logical and scientific laws we take for granted as giving us a framework for learning, generating knowledge and using knowledge are based on realism - the acceptance of universals. Therefore in a Clinical Inquiry we accept realism as an axiom.

Why is it important to identify realism as an axiom when most of you have been functioning this way for your entire lives? Realism implies the existence of universals and particulars. Because of the existence and occasional complexity of particulars we can occasionally slip into nominalism thinking. It is important that you learn to consider something as a particular and as a universal as a realist. It is important that you do not slip into nominalist thinking such as “all patients are unique” as the only truth. All patients are unique (particular), and all patients are the same as a universal (they are patients). The universal “patient” entails similar features among all things in that universal set. The American Physical Therapy Association Code of Ethics applies to the universal patient set, and thus to all particular patients. Patients are particular in their goals; but patients are universal in having goals. 

An example of slipping into nominalist thinking is thinking that none of the research applies to your patient because your patient is a particular and the research (as a particular) did not include your patient. Another example is saying that all pain is particular. If all pain is truly particular then there is no sense in having something called pain science, there is no sense in attempting to remediate the pain with an intervention attempted in another particular. So the ability to learn what works through observation (unstructured as experiences and structured as research) and apply it to another situation of pain entails the universal. 

From realism we can engage in the very useful activity of considering aspects that make something particular and those that make it universal. Pressure driven flow is a universal, we can consider the particulars of pressure driven flow in the bulk flow of the circulatory system; the bulk flow of pulmonary ventilation; and the diffusion flow of gas exchange. A synovial joint is a universal, we can consider the particulars of the elbow joint, the knee joint, the hip joint and the shoulder joint. Further, a ball and socket synovial joint is a universal that only includes the hip and shoulder joints from the above example. A final way to say this is that you’ve spent the better part of your life comparing and contrasting, considering what makes something particular and what is universal. Learning about the universals allows you to understand something about additional particulars. Learning how to relate particulars to universals is very much core to physical therapy practice. Every time you try to identify a problem in a particular case you are comparing the particular case to various universals. 

#### Set Enumeration & Set Comprehension

Set theory is utilized in logic and mathematics and can be utilized to drive home a point about particulars and universals. There are two approaches to indicate the elements of a set. Set enumeration lists all elements of the set. To enumerate means to specify one after another. If $[S]$ is a set, then set enumeration leads to $S = ({x_1},{x_2},{x_3},...,{x_n})$ for a set of $[n]$ particular elements. Set comprehension is based on an understanding (comprehension) about the set as a universal to indicate the elements of a set. With set comprehension, $S = ({x|1 \le x \le n:x})$, which means $[S]$ contains elements of $[x]$ from 1 through $[n]$. As an example, using set enumeration: $T = (2,4,8,16,32,64,128,256,512)$; and set comprehension: $T = (x|1 \le x \le 8:{2^x})$

In this more concrete example we see the value of set comprehension. By comprehending the universal feature of set \[T\] as the number 2 raised to the power of integers 1 through 8 we comprehend (understand) something about that set and can therefore explain the set using an expression about this universal characteristic. Set comprehension can also be defined in terms of testing membership in a set. A member of set $\[T\]$ is 2 raised to the power of an integer between 1 and 8.  To put this in context. Synovial joints all have a capsule and are filled with synovial fluid. We can enumerate the set of all synovial joints, or we can comprehend the set of all synovial joints. When you define synovial joint you are using set comprehension in terms of testing membership in that set. When you comprehend the set you understand something useful about the set and can, from that understanding, still enumerate. For example the set of synovial joints (has a capsule and is filled with synovial fluid) can be extended to, or simply connect the fact that every synovial joint has a closed and open pack position and a capsular pattern. Knowing that the set has these features allows you to make that statement without having to enumerate the fact for every synovial joint in particular. It also provides immediate conditions for which to test whether new particulars are elements of that set which is a valuable exercise regardless of the outcome.

￼
- [1] C. S. Peirce saw realism as an argument against nominalism. While there are varieties of realism, a common core for all realists is the affirmation of the real existence of some kind of thing or some kind of fact or affairs. Peirce (and others) saw that nominalism was damaging to epistemology.

### Common Sense Realism

Common sense realism offers a basic set of axioms that we can all agree upon regarding the methods, validity, and scope of knowledge and allows us to start off with at least a basic foundational set of agreements about how the world works and what we can know of it. Common sense realism is foundational to many epistemological systems and therefore should not be averse to empiricists, scientific realists, pragmatists or from any religious background. My education on these is from the philosopher, theologian, apologist and preacher R.C. Sproul,[1] who learned them from the writings of philosopher and Reverend Thomas Reid.[2] 	

The Law of Non-Contradiction states that something cannot be and not be in the same way at the same time. Violation of non-contradiction alerts us that something is wrong. The Law of Causation states that every event that is had a cause. It doesn’t mean we know what it is, just that a cause resulted in the observed effect. The Basic reliability of sense perception says that what we sense and perceive is basically reliable. There are occasional illusions and discrepancies between observers, but they are basically reliable and with our limitations we are still capable of understanding reality. The Analogical use of language says that to communicate knowledge we must use language. The words we use are not actually the things they represent. There is an ontological[3] distinction between the muscle and the word muscle. But we use the word muscle to represent muscle. We must assume this works from the start – we must assume we can use language as an analogy of something real that is ontologically distinct from the word itself.

- [1] R C Sproul, Not A Chance (Grand Rapids: Baker Book House, 1994).
- [2] Thomas Reid, Thomas Reid’s Inquiry and Essays (Hackett Publishing, 1983).
- [3] Relating to or based upon being or existence; ontology, a branch of metaphysics concerned with the nature and relations of being

#### Non-Contradiction

Something cannot be and not be in the same way at the same time. Non-contradiction helps to prevent skepticism. It doesn’t prevent being skeptical about a claim, that is a healthy part of dialogue and an important part of knowledge. Non-contradiction argues against universal skepticism. After all, how do you claim “to know” that nothing can be known? Or claim that nothing is true? If nothing is true, then by non-contradiction your statement “nothing is true” is called to question. So, to be a universal skeptic you need to disagree with the law of non-contradiction. Clinical Inquiry includes non-contradiction as an axiom. 

Non-Contradiction is an excellent example of an epistemological axiom that can be derived within a logical system. In Chapter 4: Theorems you will be introduced to a formal method called equational logic (eLogic). eLogic derives non-contradiction on the basis of logical axioms that define Boolean operators[1] equality, conjunction (and) and disjunction (or) and thus provides an example, in this instance, logic forming a foundation for epistemology. As discussed in the Introduction, we must approach clinical inquiry with an appreciation of the tetrad of philosophical inquiry.

Clinical examples of non contradiction are pervasive. We know that something cannot be and not be at the same time in the same way. Someone cannot be healthy, and not be healthy, in the same way at the same time. You can discuss different ways of being healthy, someone can be physically healthy and mentally not healthy, but that does not violate non-contradiction because it is a different “way” of being healthy. As we reason in clinical scenarios we are often doing tests that are either positive (and we believe something to be true and something else to be false); or negative where we then believe something to be false and something else to be true) – that is because we are relying on the law of non contradiction. When we test the reliability of any measure we are assuming that there is a truth to the measure. If there is a discrepancy between raters we assume that is because one rater made an error (or they both made an error) because it cannot be true that the patient both has a positive Lachman test and does not have a positive Lachman test “in the same way at the same time.” If claimed that they do – we look for reasons – the first reasons we should look is “the same way” – did each rater have a different idea of what a positive Lachman test is (analogical use of language)? or different hearing sensation thresholds for feeling joint arthrokinematic movement (basic reliability of sensory perception)? Next we consider time, was there enough time between measurements that the status could have changed? Much of our clinical reasoning is predicated on and sustained by a belief in the law of non contradiction. 
￼
- [1] A Boolean operator works on Boolean variables which are the binary (2 state) variables true and false. Considering true as 1, and false as 0 gives rise to binary digits (abbreviated as bits) which is the fundamental unit for measuring information. Bits combined with Boolean operators dictate the operation of the logic gates that allow your computer processor to function. “Boolean” refers to the logician and mathematician that applied logic to algebra in the 19th century: George Boole, considered by most the father of the computation and the Information Age.

#### Analogical Use of Language

To review quickly. Epistemology is the theory of knowledge, including the origin of knowledge, the role of experience and reason in generating knowledge and the relationship between knowledge and certainty. When we practice (make decisions, do actions) we are using knowledge as universals to understand particulars. Clinical epistemology is the foundation of clinical practice. 

For us to discuss epistemology – to talk about knowledge, transmit knowledge, learn knowledge – we have to use language. And when we are talking about things we know (or want to know) we must use language. The words we use are not actually the things they represent. There is an ontological distinction between the muscle and the word muscle. But we use the word muscle to represent muscle. For epistemology we have to assume this works from the start – we have to assume we can use language as an analogy of something real that is ontologically distinct from the word itself.

The analogical use of language is a very simple and easy to agree to core component – hence being part of “common sense realism.” Though it is interesting how often we fall into the trap of defining words based on an initial analogy with a real, ontologically distinct entity and coming to believe that the word is then the same thing and how that may pass in discussion as incorrect knowledge. One brief example that will be expanded on later to weave all of the Common Sense Realism axioms together is related to lung sounds. There are crackles (a sound we hear that is not normally present with auscultation of the lungs). There are at least two distinct types of crackle sounds. So we then have a word to describe (modify) the analogical representation of sounds – fine or coarse crackles. All of these words are analogically related to the ontological entity (something in reality that we can sense and perceive). Whether we hear “fine crackles” or “coarse crackles” has to do with what is in reality and our sensory perception and then we utter the words to represent what we hear. 

We have to be careful with how we use language to analogically represent ontology (being) of real things (realism). Accepting the analogical use of language as an epistemological axiom does not mean we can take it for granted. On the contrary, it means we must be diligent with understanding what we mean by the words and language we utilize. Too often “It’s just semantics” undermines our ability to learn, know and communicate. If you ever feel you are not understanding someone else’s knowledge, first consider how they are using language to represent the objects of knowledge that is being discussed. In fact, too often what is confusing about course material in classes such as anatomy, physiology and patient management are differences in language. Understanding the words torque and moments as the same thing; and understanding the slight variation in usage between joint integrity, motion, mobility, play and arthrokinematics as related topics is extremely important. 

#### Basic Reliability of Sensory Perception

We need to accept that what we sense and then perceive from the world (reality) is basically reliable. Our senses can be deceived, our perception altered, both can change over time and are variable between people, but we have to accept basic reliability in them. We accept that basic reliability before we set out to understand reality reliably. For example, before we even try to see whether there is intra or inter rater reliability[1] for manual muscle testing we presuppose that there is at least basic reliability in the ability of people to perceive a force. This reasoning applies to any physical examination. We presuppose a basic reliability to perceive the phenomenon. Because the reliability is basic means that there is some probability to the confidence about "Exam is positive” or “Exam is not positive”. Therefore, there is value in holding further discussion about the basic reliability of sensory perception until after we’ve considered probability in Chapter 5. Also, we cannot sense everything and thus we rely on the use of other mechanisms (such as a stethoscope, an electrocardiograph, an ultrasound unit) as well as models (relate force to torque, relate light refraction to oxygen levels in the blood) to assist our basic reliability. Therefore, there is also value in holding further discussion until after we have introduced models in Chapter 7. 

￼
- [1] Intra rater reliability is consistency and agreement between measurements taken by one individual. Inter rater reliability is consistency and agreement between measurements taken by more than one individual.

#### Law of Causation

The Law of Causation states that every event that is had a cause. It doesn’t mean we know what it is, just that a cause resulted in the observed effect. The simplest example to consider would be from Newtonian mechanics in Physics, the law of inertia. An object at rest stays at rest. An object in motion stays in motion (no change in velocity, which means no change in speed or direction). If we observe a change, it is because something caused the change. Physical therapy practice (indeed much of human behavior) is predicated on the the law of causation. Our search for a cause of pain presumes there is a cause regardless of the ontology of that cause. Our use of interventions to change anatomical structure or physiological function presumes that these interventions can cause changes to structure or function. 

Consider cause the noun and cause the verb and their inescapable integration. It is easier to start with cause the verb. Cause the verb is same thing as causation: causing or producing an effect. Cause the verb is the action of causing. A cause the noun is a reason for an action or condition; something that brings about an effect. Cause the noun is something, but not just anything, something that brings about an effect (that therefore requires cause the verb – the action). Anything that is (i.e. exists) is something, but not everything is a cause at all times. For our clinical inquiry we will focus on causes that exist in reality (realism) without focusing on exist as the metaphysics of being vs. non being. Being vs. non being is a huge metaphysical divergence that pushes the tetrad of philosophical inquiry to its limit. Of course there are clinical examples of “causes” of “nothing”, such as “Not doing your exercises caused you to deteriorate.” Another approach to this is use of counterfactuals. Exercise would have caused non deterioration. The counterfactual is that not doing exercise means you do not cause non deterioration and therefore by double negation (do not cause non) means cause deterioration. Counter factual are useful. But they don’t really address the metaphysical issue of being vs. non being because we can debate whether counter factors exist. 

David Hume had a problem with causation which has led to years of dialogue about the existence of causation. However, Hume’s main problem with causation was our ability to know causation. Hume was an empiricist (epistemology that relates all knowledge exclusively to experience). His solution to what we think we see as causation was the constant conjunction theory of causation

*“Two events A and B are constantly conjoined if when one occurs the other does; this relationship is what is meant by saying that one causes the other, or that if more is intended by talking of causation, nevertheless this is all that we can understand by the notion.”* Oxford Dictionary of Philosophy (ODP) 

This is very empirical way of looking at it – which makes sense for Hume as an empiricist. We continue to recognize what Hume has stated about our empirical observations – if you have heard the statement that “correlation does not imply causation” then you are saying that the empirical data of constant conjunction (correlation) does not imply a causal association. We all agree with this, but is that all we can know? Perhaps it is to an empiricist. This is a limit of empiricism and one of the main reasons Clinical Inquiry is based on critical realism. At this point we’ve left out a major figure in modern philosophy with Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason. Kant argues for the unity of consciousness presupposing orderly experience with universal and necessary laws – all of which is part of the critical realist approach. In other words, Kant refuted Hume. But since Bhaskar and McGrath expanded on Kant they form our bridge from Common Sense Realism to Critical Realism in our approach in this Clinical Inquiry.

The empirical perspective turns out to be a limiting factor in some approaches to evidence based practice. Simply gathering empirical evidence does not lead to the generation of knowledge about cause, as Hume pointed out, it cannot. The empiricist approach to practice is limited in attribution to cause and thus cause is not a major part of the dialogue. But it should be. Practice is primarily about causal inference, reasoning about causes. Even when we consider the reliability of a test, or the validity of a measure we are reasoning that whatever we intend to test or measure is causing our instrument or measurement system to change in a predictable, reliable and meaningful way for interpretation. The collection of empirical facts cannot produce knowledge about causes. Don’t get me wrong, the collection of empirical facts is a necessary condition, but not a sufficient condition. In all honesty, there is no one that would attempt to claim verbally that empirical facts are a sufficient condition for knowledge to guide practice. But actions sometimes deceive our verbal proclamations.

In summary, the empirical tradition and its approach to causation cannot be the epistemological framework for practice. The epistemological axiom described as the law of causation helps to posit causation as real and the next step will be to consider critical realism as we consider how to know (and know about) the causation that exists.

#### Example

An example that weaves these four axioms of common sense realism together would be teaching about lung sounds. This example was introduced in the section on the Analogical Use of Language. It is here expanded to point out how the other axioms come into play. 
There seem to be at least two distinct types of crackle sounds. Therefore, we have a word to further describe the analogical representation of sounds – fine or coarse crackles. These words are analogically related to the ontological entity (a sensory perception in our brain). Whether we hear fine crackles or coarse crackles is connected to our sensory perception and then we utter the words to represent what we hear. But sometimes people use the words dry crackles when they hear fine crackles. They are using a different word to modify their crackles.  The words “dry crackles” represent something different ontologically.  The words dry crackles are going beyond the sensory perception of sound to something about the nature of the cause of the sound. Dry crackles are presumed to be caused by a dry source – something that is not wet, not mucous, not secretions, not edema, not inflammation. When discussing what we know, the use of the language dry crackles reports that we know the cause of the sound we hear (or at least some general characteristic of the cause). Whereas a fine crackle merely reports on the sound we have perceived and, as such, is analogically related to only the effect (not the cause) and therefore contains less knowledge. Finally, reporting “dry coarse crackles” would be a contradiction based on the current use of language and alerts us to a possible problem, perhaps with sensory perception, perhaps with the use of language. But if you understand the modified “dry” and “coarse” as described above it is a contradiction to have both and therefore whoever you are speaking with may have a different definition. Confusion related to having a different definition is unfortunately common. The author is not a person willing to accept the claim: “It is just semantics.” A further question about the claim of dry crackles is whether such a claim is justified? That is related to the ontology of the cause – effect relationship of dry crackles. If the cause of fine crackles is only ever a dry cause then we probably are justified since fine crackles could only be the effect of a dry cause. That is not the claim here – it is simply raised as a point to highlight the importance of consideration causation. 

Similarly, there is more knowledge in the statement: “That patient has angina.” Than the statement: “That patient has chest pain.” Even though we recognize that angina is often chest pain, chest pain is not always angina. Why? These words are referring to different real things ontologically. Chest pain is referring to pain in the chest (an effect) with no claim about the cause of that pain. But angina is referring to a symptom (usually pain in the chest) that, for some reason, we feel justified in claiming to know the cause of that pain (myocardial ischemia). It is typical (or should be) to withhold the term angina for times when additional information brings additional knowledge that makes abduction to ischemia the best explanation of the chest pain prior to using the term angina.

### Critical Realism

Critical realism (Bhaskar, as discussed in McGrath) takes common sense realism and scientific realism[1] and points out important considerations about reality and knowledge. McGrath provides a nice concise definition of critical realism: 

*“Reality is apprehended by the human mind, which attempts to express and accommodate that reality as best it can with the tools at its disposal – such as mathematical formula or mental models.”*

Critical realism explicitly identifies the human mind as part of the process of knowledge. This makes explicit use of models to represent the reality encountered. In other words – the mental models that are constructed are knowledge and goal of a model is to fit with reality even when we cannot empirically verify each and every component of the model. Reality orders what we encounter. Therefore reality frames our mental models and empirical evidence thus frames and constrains our mental models. But they are mental models. They lead to inferences that extend beyond what can be observed while still being representative of reality.  Our powers of observation are limited (basic reliability in sensory perception). The Oxford Dictionary of Philosophy defines critical realism as

*“Any doctrine reconciling the real, independent objective nature of the world (realism) with a due appreciation of the mind-dependence of the sensory experiences whereby we know about it (critical).”* Oxford Dictionary of Philosophy 

In Clinical Inquiry we accept two important axioms from critical realism to add to our four common sense realism axioms. The first is that is that ontology determines epistemology – the way things are determines how and what we can know about them. The second axiom from critical realism is the stratification of reality – the world is regarded as differentiated and hierarchically stratified. These then interact. Because of the stratification of reality and ontology determines epistemology the way things are at any level of stratification determines how and what we can know each level of stratification.

- [1] “Empirical notion, in that it is grounded in an actual encounter with reality. Its justification is not to be founded in a priori philosophical reflections, but in a posteriori engagement with the natural world itself. Its plausibility and confirmations arise from direct engagement with the real world, through repeated observations and experiment” McGrath, 2003

#### Examples

*World Health Organization International Classification of Function*

In considering the interaction of ontology determines epistemology and the stratification of reality we will consider the World Health Organization International Classification of Function (WHO-ICF), hence forth referred to as the ICF. The ICF is a model and it is a useful model to physical therapy practice. There are necessary consequences of recognizing that health can be defined across stratifications of reality such as body structure and functions, activity and participation. They are connected, but are also very different due to the strata of reality. The differences in each strata entail different approaches to how and what we can know about each strata. And the existence of each strata entails the importance of recognizing dependency connections[1] between the strata. For example, participation is dependent on activity (broadly defined to include consciousness).

*Hierarchy & Emergence of Systems & Complexity*

A clear example of the importance of the two axioms added by adopting critical realism is the importance of the hierarchy and emergence of anatomical and physiological systems and their complexity.  A unique aspect of physical therapy practice is that we encounter a wide range of stratifications of reality. From the biological through the social and cultural. Within the biological, physiological and behavioral (once we consider neuroscience and motor learning) stratifications each has tremendous complexity. With each step from atoms to molecules to organelles to cells to tissues to organs to physiological systems to integrated physiological systems to a human to a person in an environment we face an increasing set of variables under consideration. The state that these variables can be in, and the interactions that are possible are constrained by and follow universal laws that can be modeled. The number of these variables and the total possible number of system states can increase exponentially from one level of reality to the next. In other situations the number of system states decreases as we progress from one level of reality to the next. For example, it is easier to describe the state of water when it is crystalline as ice than trying to account for all positions and velocities of each water molecule which is harder than assumptions made when describing water as bulk fluid flow. Both of these situations occur at the same time and require consideration. There are times when considering brain functions such as cognition is required as a distinct strata of reality. There are other times when considering specific sets of neurons and nerve function is required as a distinct strata of reality. There are other times when the action of particular molecules is required such as understanding how a medication influences receptors for a neurotransmitter, which then impacts nerve function (different strata) and then impacts cognitive function (different strata). Finally, there are situations where cross stratification dependencies are causal and situations when they are are not causal. For example, the macroscopic properties of a tissue are dependent on the microscopic properties and those macroscopic properties are causal. The macroscopic characteristics of collagen are causally related to but not completely determined by the microscopic characteristics of the cells and cellular products that comprise the collagen. However, the macroscopic properties of activity (say locomotion) are dependent on the microscopic properties of body structure and function but are not caused by body structure and function, they are enabled by and dependent on, but not caused by.[2]

￼
- [1] Dependency connections may be causal, but they do not need to be causal. For example, cells are dependent on organelles and a cell membrane, but we may not be willing to say that organelles and a cell membrane cause a cell.
- [2] This idea and its consequences that causation belongs to a larger set called dependence is new and requires further development.

#### Implications of Critical Realism

Critical realism allows us to take empirical facts from the “real, independent, objective” world and know about them through our mind (rationalism). Critical realism rejects skepticism (which is quite important for any epistemology), and offers a balance between pure empiricism and pure rationalism.[1] When philosophy was driven to the extremes of empiricism by Hume the result was skepticism, particularly with regard to cause. The opposite extreme - extreme rationalism - is not no better for clinical practice. For the extremes of rationalism we need only consider the historical fact of the unwillingness of doctors to wash their hands until germ theory was developed, despite evidence that hand washing led to a massive reduction in patient mortality when assisting with births or performing operations. In other words, without the theory (rationalism) the empirical evidence was ignored. This must also be avoided. Assuming doctors did not believe the empirical evidence because there was no rationale theory to support the evidence – we confront a tragic situation whereby extreme rationalism negatively impacted clinical practice.  Critical realism provides a balance between empirical and rational approaches in generating knowledge of the truth, which then informs (guides) practice.

As an example of extreme empiricism impacting clinical practice. Through several years of teaching classes that require students to review evidence using currently accepted evidence based documents such as systematic reviews of randomized controlled trials or a clinical practice guideline (highly influenced by empiricism) there were very few conclusions that seemed to indicate that the students knew something after they were done. The most prevalent result was agnosticism (not knowing) which students actually defaulted to skepticism about the content matter under consideration. They knew how to assess the evidence based documents, they knew how to assess the evidence from an empirical perspective; but the approach left them – often times – more confused about the causal relationships (required for practice) investigated by the documents and therefore about how to apply the “knowledge” (or lack there of) in practice. This skepticism could be the real state (realism) – it could be true that there is an uncertain, low probability, or perhaps no causal relation in the variables under study in all of the projects completed. Or, it could be the result of extreme empiricism instead of using empirical observations to inform a more critical realist approach. The approach Clinical Inquiry suggests does not disregard empirical evidence towards an extreme rationalism. Clinical Inquiry does not call for a cessation of all data collection – far from it – collect the data, run the analyses, it is needed. But it does suggest an explicit regard for the rationale process of building causal models for use in inferential networks (dynamic inference).
Assuming it is true that a balance between empirical and rational approaches is required, the big question becomes how do we determine the right balance? Is it a static balance, or a dynamic balance? In other words – is there an approach that holds regardless of the state of empirical evidence and rational models (static balance), or does the approach need to change based on the state of empirical evidence and rational models (dynamic balance)? If static – what is the approach? If dynamic – what is the approach, in particular what determines the need to change the approach?

Critical realism as the foundation for Clinical Inquiry proposes a particular balance between empiricism and rationalism. Clinical Inquiry articulates how our understanding about cause through empirical and rational systems arbitrates the balance in an iterative process of model building. **Those models (representations of knowledge) allow us to make inferences for clinical practice decision making. The models are tested empirically (to prevent us from hyper rationalism), and the models are built rationally (to prevent us from hyper empiricism).**

- [1] This is a simplification of much more complicated philosophical argument but suffices for now if the reader agrees with what has been said so far about critical realism and is willing to proceed.

## Conclusion

Starting with realism (as opposed to nominalism) we accept that universals exist which allows practice based on knowledge. We accept that particulars exist as well which means due diligence is required to know whether and how a particular fits within a universal, or when a universal can be applied to a particular. We accept that there are universal laws, facts and relationships in reality that can be known. Adding common sense to realism we accept non-contradiction, causation, analogical use of language and the basic reliability of sensory perception as epistemological tools to generate and use knowledge about universals. Finally, adding critical realism we accept that reality is apprehended by the human mind, which attempts to express and accommodate that reality as best it can with the tools at its disposal; ontology determines epistemology and reality is stratified (hierarchical). Clinical Inquiry arbitrates the balance between empirical and rational systems in an iterative process of model building where models are tested empirically (to prevent us from hyper rationalism), and the models are built rationally (to prevent us from hyper empiricism).

## Exercises

- (1.1)	Provide an example from anatomy or physiology of set enumeration and set comprehension (in English, not using set notation; and not the synovial joint example provided in the text).
- (1.2)	Use your understanding of set comprehension to answer the question: Do we have a patella tendon or a patella ligament?
- (1.3)	“This sentence is false.” Logicians and mathematicians claim that this sentence is a paradox because if it is true then it is false, but if it is false then it is true. Use insights from critical realism to resolve this paradox. 
- (1.4) 	Compare and contrast the concepts (definitions - some are in the APTA Guide to Physical Therapist Practice) for joint integrity, joint mobility, joint play and arthrokinematics based on what you have learned in this chapter. 
- (1.5) 	Consider joint integrity and joint mobility from the perspective of stratification of reality. What are they dependent on? Is this dependency causal?
- (1.6) 	Explain the connection between Hume’s problem of induction (his argument against our knowledge of causation) and nominalism. 
- (1.7) 	When you consider the application of results from a systematic review to a patient you are accepting the universal. But, when concluding that these results do not apply to a particular patient, are you being a nominalist (are you rejecting the existence of the universal)?
