---
title: Four Rs, Reading, wRiting, aRithmetic, Reflection
author: Sean M Collins
date: '2020-12-23'
slug: four-Rs-Reading-wRiting-aRithmetic-Reflection
categories:
  - Being & Becoming
tags:
  - Academics
  - Physical Therapy
subtitle: ''
summary: ''
authors: []
lastmod: '2020-12-23T07:36:51-05:00'
draft: false
featured: no
image:
  caption: ''
  focal_point: ''
  preview_only: no
projects: []
---
I'm often asked, "What are you looking for in a student to the graduate program in physical therapy?" These posts on "Being & Becoming" attempts to answer that question for anyone that is inclined to read. The post series will develop slowly and thoughtfully to exemplify reflection.  The simplest answer is that we are looking for good students. Good students are good learners. In addition to learning from all experiences, good learners possess a solid foundation in the three R's plus one: **R**eading, w**R**iting, a**R**ithmetic, and **R**eflection. I'm often told that this is obvious. Such can be said about any student whether undergraduate or graduate, or whether for physical therapy or any other profession or discipline. While verbally obvious, it turns out to be the most challenging prepatory set to find in a potential student. 

As a professional (clinical) doctoral program the program in which I teach requires an undergraduate degree be completed prior to entry. This is to ensure that incoming candidates possess a solid foundation in the three R's along with a certain breadth and depth of knowledge in a relevant field. And for physical therapy (like medicine, or law) it turns out any field whatsoever is relevant as long as a certain minimal set of prerequisites are included (more on this later - but I'd personally rather have a student enter with a BA in the liberal arts and sciences with the pre-requisites completed along with experience in some sort of physically engaging activity either competitive or as a hobby than someone with a BS in exercise science, kinesiology or health science.  Yes, a physically engaging activity (either competitive or as a hobby) should be a pre-requisite because there is a certain *physical intelligence* required in the practice of physical therapy that, for whatever reason, we ignore during the admissions process and that turns out to be challenging to educate.

In the next several posts I will take the four Rs: **R**eading, w**R**iting, a**R**ithmetic, and **R**eflection and consider each separately, how they interact, how they contribute to success in academics in general, and how together they can ensure the education of a physical therapist ready for practice in the service of their clients.
